---
title:  "Physician, Heal Thyself"
date: 2023-07-17
---
*I was left with some reflections (and doubts) after the psychiatry lectures I received over my first year in medical school. I have been putting off writing them up, but in the interest of populating this blog with* something, *below lie some disorganised impressions on the topic. Take seriously at your own caution.*

The word “biopsychosocial” comes up a lot in lectures, which is directionally good, but the supposedly equal treatment of these factors seems nominal and epistemologically confused. The unspoken implication of a lot of this teaching is that the psyche is a causal substrate of neuroanatomy and neurochemistry, which is no doubt defensible, but nonetheless establishes a hierarchy in which the psychosocial component is subjugated by the biological. I wouldn’t have an issue with being taught in this way so long as these assumptions were articulated. But they can’t be, because accepting the causal primacy of the brain implies the induction-aptness of the mind, which is tantamount to dissolving phenomenological existence. And this too I could accept, so long as psychiatric diagnosis was similarly induction-apt, if it was simply identifying neuroses on an fMRI. But the diagnostic protocols hinge on the reality of subjective experience, returning us to the initial problem. So it seems to me that “biopsychosociality” functions as a conversational stopping point - instead of allowing the resolution of these factors into a coherent model, it holds them in an unstable superposition of “perspectives”, never allowing them to make contact with reality.

One way we can understand how things got this way is starting with J.F. Meckel’s methods in the latter half of the 18th century. His approach to neuropathology was painstaking: after delicately segmenting the brain, he precisely weighed the disordered tissues and calculated their volume via displacement. The disorders were thought to be a product of density: the root of the pathology was hydration, with both dehydrated and swollen tissues resulting in neuroses. Contemporary neuropathology, starting roughly with Bichat, is far more brutal and mechanical in process, forgoing the precision of the scales for the smashing of the skull. The act of treatment is the taking of the pound of flesh, the excision of chunks from the seat of consciousness *in vivo*. Yet somehow, the latter identifies itself with the aesthetics of the former: providing concrete objectivity through empirical vigilance. Meckel’s work, on the other hand, is seen with a degree of primitivism, or at the very least as useless arbitrations of quantity.

We can see, then, that all medical knowledge seeks to legitimise itself with the same empirical gaze. The gaze is dislocated from the practice itself: the difference between the barber surgeon trepanning the skull of some poor medieval schmuck, and the no less gruesome act of resetting a poorly healed bone today, is not in kind, but in perception. The latter has earned obviously earned its chops in this regard, outcome-wise, but the overarching point is that all kinds of things can be smuggled into the medical mainstream with sufficient [RCT window dressing](https://slatestarcodex.com/2014/04/28/the-control-group-is-out-of-control/).

What do we do about this? I think it starts with adopting a vigilance towards scientism in medical pedagogy, especially towards circular arguments that revolve around either the sanctity of scientific process or the expertise of the prescriber. This poisonous “expertise culture” in medicine, in which the epistemic gap between doctor and patient is leveraged to reinforce the already unmitigable power dynamics of the clinic, is harmful to both parties in the long term. It is clearly disintegrating trust in the medical establishment, and the further this culture is ratcheted up, the greater the professional cost of defection for the individual physician.

It would behove all involved to remember that as the corpus of medical knowledge has expanded, more cognitive energy is dedicated to the rote memorisation of fact. This procedural reasoning has displaced the kind of first-order reasoning that is necessary to be a good diagnostician. As such, it is not clear to me that there is anything to be gained from maintaining a façade of authority. This is especially true in specialities like psychiatry where it is plainly obvious that we lack the conceptual tooling to meaningfully contend with the illnesses in question. As the wheel continues to turn, and the replication crisis continues to intensify, I cannot help but wonder what proportion of today’s medical doctrine will be seen by the future the way we see Meckel today.

